feat: refactor logout docs (#1143)
ory/docs: docs/kratos/self-service/flows/user-logout.mdx

title: User logout
---

```mdx-code-block
import { apiFlow } from "./code/logout"
import CodeTabs from "@theme/Code/CodeTabs"
import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs"
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem"
import browserExample from "!!raw-loader!./code/logout/samples/browser/node.ts"
import spaExample from "!!raw-loader!./code/logout/samples/spa/react.txt"
import CodeBlock from "@theme/CodeBlock"
```

The logout flow is used to terminate an Ory Identities session. Ory supports logout on all supported clients:

> - [Server rendered browser applications](#server-side-browser-applications)

Author: Done.

> - [Client side browser applications](#client-side-browser-applications)

Author: grr, why is there no tooling for that? Fixed.

- [Native applications](#native-api-applications)

## Server-side browser applications

> To ensure that a logout was intended by the user, Ory Identities first generates a logout URL for a given Ory Session cookie. You
> can then open the logout URL in the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure that logging out is performed by the user intentionally, Ory Identities first generates a logout URL for a given Ory Session cookie. You
can then open the logout URL in the browser.
```

> The logout URL is valid for the duration of the session. This means that you can call the endpoint once and cache this URL for
> some time before you call the endpoint again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The logout URL is valid for the duration of the user's session. This means that you can call the endpoint before the user decides they want to log out and cache the logout URL. You can then use the cached URL when the user performs the action required to log out, for example, accesses a designated UI element.
```

> Alternatively, you can create the logout URL only when the user actually clicks the logout button and immediately call the
> resulting `logout_url` from your server to log out the user. Beware, that this method can lead to inconsistent behavior for users
> that switch accounts often.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can call the endpoint at the moment when the user performs the action required to log out 
and immediately call the `logout_url` from your server to log out the user. 

:::warning

This approach can lead to inconsistent system behavior for users who often switch between accounts

:::
```

So I edited this but I can't say I understand how this is different (for the end user) from the other behavior. I mean, it still logs me out when I click a "log out" button, right? How can this second behavior confuse me in any way? Isn't this just a backend difference? The first approach requires implementing some caching mechanism while the other doesn't?

Reviewer: So two different accounts (A + B) use the same cookie? If that's the case then what you said makes sense to me. But I'd except a cookie per identity and then I don't know how this would work. 🤔

Author: You only have one cookie per browser. Tabs share all cookies for a page. So yes, effectively: two accounts use the same cookie.

Reviewer: Oh, okay. I'll come up with a way to describe it better then.

```mdx-code-block
<CodeBlock language="ts" title="index.ts">{browserExample}</CodeBlock>
```

> ### After logout redirect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Post-logout redirect
```

Author: It's called `After-logout redirect` in the cosnole, best to stay consistent here, I think.

Reviewer: Hm, it's not - just checked

<img width="648" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/29116492/206458361-311e2342-1de7-420d-a7fe-08293f8e2354.png">

Author: Hm, wat? I swear it was a day ago. Alright then.

> After successful logout, the browser will be redirected either to the `return_to` query parameter from the initial request URL, or
> fall back to the default post logout return URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a successful logout, the system redirects the browser to the address defined in the `return_to` query parameter of the logout request URL. If this address is unreachable, the browser is redirected to the default post-logout return URL.
```

```mdx-code-block
<Tabs group="console-or-cli">
  <TabItem value="console" label="Ory Console" default>
```

You can set a default return URL in the [Ory Console](https://console.ory.sh/projects/current/browser-redirects) on the **Browser
Redirects** page using the **Post-Logout Redirect** value.

```mdx-code-block
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="cli" label="Ory CLI">
```

You can set the default return URL after a logout using the [Ory CLI](../../../guides/cli/01_installation.mdx):

```shell
ory patch identity-config {project-id} \

>    --replace '/selfservice/flows/logout/after/default_browser_return_url="https://example.org"'

Reviewer: `https://example.org` is a placeholder, please use curly brackets 
https://github.com/ory/docs#placeholders-and-dummy-data

>    --replace '/selfservice/flows/logout/after/default_browser_return_url="https://example.org"'

Reviewer: It's better to add an intro sentence b4 the tabs: 

`To set the default post-logout return URL:`

in console tab: 

`Go to **Browser Redirects** and set the URL in the **Post-Logout Redirect** field.`

in CLI tab: 

`Run this command:`

```

```mdx-code-block
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
```

If an error occurs, the browser is redirected to the [Error UI](./user-facing-errors.md).

> ## Single page application (SPAs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Single page application (SPA)
```

Similar to server-side browser applications, Ory Identities first generates a logout URL for a given Ory Session Cookie. However,
you can simply call the logout URL using an AJAX request.

> The following example requires the [Ory Tunnel](../../../guides/cli/20_proxy-and-tunnel.mdx).

Reviewer: That's a bit of a surprise. I'd expect that in the context of an app that we're shown and that's just an isolated bit of code just for logout. Can you make it more generic? I can imagine that this confuses someone and makes them thing that you need Tunnel to do logouts in SPAs.

Reviewer: Examples from the next paragraph don't say anything like that - that's the approach I'd expect.

Author: > makes them thing that you need Tunnel to do logouts in SPAs

You need the tunnel to logout (or rather use Ory Network at all) from SPAs, AFAIU. Because with SPAs you run into CORS issues, where the browser prevents you from talking to a domain apart from the domain the application is hosted on.

Author: To elaborate on this: I think they way people will use this doc is, they will implement Ory in their `SPA` (client side javascript!) and at some point want to see how logout is done. 

But if they already use the Ory Network for development (as we intend them to) they already have the `ory tunnel` running, because you can't write SPA apps that interact with the Ory Network without it, AFAICU. This sentence is just here as a reminder, because if you do it without the tunnel, the browser will just throw a bunch of CORS errors (which are really annoying to debug, let me tell you :D) and nothing works.

title: User logout
---

```mdx-code-block
import { apiFlow, browserFlow, spaFlow } from "./code/logout"
import CodeTabs from "@site/src/theme/Code/CodeTabs"
import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs"
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem"
```

The logout flow is used to terminate an Ory Identities session.

> Ory supports logout on all supported clients:

Author: Makes sense. Done.

- [Server rendered browser applications](#server-side-browser-applications)
- [Client side browser applications](#client-side-browser-applications)
- [Native applications](#native-api-applications)

## Server-side browser applications

To ensure that a logout was intended by the user, Ory Identities first generates a logout URL for a given Ory Session cookie. You
can then open the logout URL in the browser.

> In practice, it is recommended to call the endpoint every time you want to show a logout button to the user.

Author: Ah nice, makes sense.

Alternatively, you can create the logout URL only when the user actually clicks the logout button and immediately call the
resulting `logout_url` from your server to log out the user. Beware, that this method can lead to inconsistent behavior for users
that switch accounts often.

<CodeTabs items={browserFlow} />

### After logout redirects

After successful logout, the browser will be redirected either to the `return_to` query parameter from the initial request URL, or
fall back to the default post logout return URL.

```mdx-code-block
<Tabs group="oc-vs-oss">

>   <TabItem value="oc" label="The Ory Network" default>

Author: Yup, done.

```

You can set a default return URL in the [Ory Console](https://console.ory.sh/projects/current/browser-redirects) on the **Browser
Redirects** page using the **Post-Logout Redirect** value.

```mdx-code-block
  </TabItem>

>   <TabItem value="oss" label="Ory Identities">

Reviewer 2: And this should show how to do it using the Ory CLI (**please test this yourself, i only wrote what i think should work**):

```
ory patch identity-config {project_id}
  --replace '/selfservice/flows/logout/after/default_browser_return_url="https://example.org"'
```

Author: Works. Done.

        default_browser_return_url: http://test.ory.sh:4000/
```

```mdx-code-block
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
```

If an error occurs, the browser is redirected to the [Error UI](./user-facing-errors.md).

> ## Client-side browser applications

Reviewer 2: Should we just call this single page apps?

Author: How about `## Single page application (SPAs)` so people can recognize the buzzword (SPA) as well?

Similar to server-side browser applications, Ory Identities first generates a logout URL for a given Ory Session Cookie. However,
you can simply call the logout URL using an AJAX request.

The following example requires the [Ory Tunnel](../../../guides/cli/20_proxy-and-tunnel.mdx).

> <CodeTabs items={spaFlow} />

Reviewer 2: Only one tab - maybe just include the content itself?
